The Unmeasured Weight
In a regular day of school, in front of the desk in the first row, sat 14-year-old boy. On his computer screen, a new email named ‘Result of Scholarship Application’ came to his inbox. He moved his cursor with excitement, imagining the life after success, and clicked on the button. With a flicker on the screen, the texts were displayed, “Richard, after the evaluation by the school scholarship committee, we are sorry to inform you that your application for school scholarship was rejected.” On the right half of the screen, it was the source code the club attendance system he developed for school. Richard closed the laptop lid tardily and walked outside the classroom slowly and disappointedly to give himself a short break.
“I cannot understand, ” Richard whispered to the wall, “It doesn’t make sense.” He didn’t look up. At this moment, his friend Mango walked past him, feeling curious about Richard’s words. “My scholarship! They said my comprehensive scores are insufficient!” Richard cried, with his fist punching the wall and drops of tears falling onto his shoes. Mango watched with heavy heart; the actions Richard had done were like knives. He understood that Richard had top scores in mathematics and science subjects and high contribution to the community.
“So, what is my real problem?” Richard turned to Mango with tears spinning in his hollow eyes. Mango screamed inside, considering to tell the truth, it was too vague, too cruel, and too unrealistic, “Maybe… The competition was throat-cutting and … your grades in other subjects pulled your … overall GPA down?” His eyes darted randomly, but this is the best lie that Mango could think up to help Richard, while it is still horrible.
With the ring of the bell, they went to their classes.
In the future days, Mango saw Richard sitting on his chair with hollow eyes, not doing anything, like his life terminated here. On the name lists of the student council and the coding club, Richard’s name was no longer there, it was deleted or crossed out. When Mango tried to visit Richard’s personal website, he only received a message that said the service was ‘temporarily’ offline.
Mango’s blood ran cold. The lie, meant to protect and motivate, had become a cage that restricted Richard. It was not comforting, settling, or calming, but changing him, cancelling his brilliance, interest and responsibility, and replace him with a plain but acceptable template.
Mango stood in front of Richard. who was still disappointed and depressed, having no courage to look at Mango’s eyes. Mango’s emotions were mixed, unable to come up with a sentence to say.
Finally, Mango understood, and spoke, “The competition is not fierce, you are successful. The ranking is just a monstrous rubric for the scholarship. They couldn’t see past GPA, a number to evaluate your actual value.”
As the words ‘scholarship’ and ‘GPA’ floated in the air, Mango saw Richard’s body flinch as if struck. He didn’t turn around with anger. Instead, his shoulders began to shake. He pressed his face into his hands with his desperate sobs. It wasn’t just sadness, it was a torrent of weeks, months of pent-up pressure, of the dismissed achievement and every unseen effort, finally crashing through the dam.
Mango stood frozen, watching the physical proof of the damage. The numbers act like triggers that had broken his friend. He came forward and gave Richard a warm hug
Finally, the storm passed. Richard slowly wiped his face; his eyes were red and swollen, but when he looked at Mango, there was a new clarity in his gaze. The enemy had a name now, and it wasn’t him.
Richard took a deep breath and smiled sadly but softly. The unmeasured weight of his worth was finally settled - no longer defined by a table.
